---
layout: post
title: 'The Flow of Time: Prob/Measure/Transport/Generative Mumble(7): Generative Modeling, Part I: General Frameworks'
date: 2026-03-13 14:22:33
description: Discrete OT, Semi-Discrete OT, Convex Geometry
series: The Flow of Time
# thumbnail: /assets/img/blogs/spd.png
tags: 
    - "Probability"
    - "Optimal Transport"
categories: 
    - "Brain-Computer Interface"
featured: false
related_posts: true
related_publications: true
citation: true
math: true
toc:
  beginning: true
  sidebar: left
---

## 0] General Framework

The central task of generative modeling: modeling $$p(x)$$ by $$p_{\theta}(x)$$


### 0.1] Hardship of Sampling
Since in general we have no closed-form solutions, traditional sampling techniques, such as Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) and Langevin dynmics are not applicable. 

---

### 0.2] Sampling vs Density Evaluation
Similar to discriminative vs generative models, 

---

## 1] Log-Likelihood

### 1.1] Two Evaluations Methods

---

## 2] Equivalence of MLE and KL Divergence 

### 2.1] An Intuitive Derivation 

---

### 2.2] A Subtlety: Two Schemes in Generative Modeling
KL divergence is not symmetric. 

---

## 3] Modeling Frameworks

### 3.1] Latent Variable Models

#### 3.1.1] Latent Variable Framework

$$p(x) = \int_z p(x|z)p(z)dz$$

where $$p(z)$$ is known (simple distribution designed by us beforehnd, easy to sample). 

Consequently, if we could model $$p(x|z)$$ with $$p_{\theta}(x|z)$$ we could then model $$p(x)$$ by $$p_\theta(x) = \int_z p_{\theta}(x|z)p(z)$$. Again, here we know the closed form of $$p(z)$$ and we know how to sample from it (this is our choice). 

#### 3.1.2] The Problem: Intractable Posterior

Suppose we have a probabilistic model

$$
p(x, z) = p(x \mid z)q(z)
$$

where

- $x$ = observed data  
- $z$ = latent variables  

The posterior is

$$
p(z \mid x) = \frac{p(x,z)}{p(x)}
$$

The difficulty is the **evidence**:

$$
p(x) = \int p(x,z) \, dz
$$

This integral is usually **intractable**.

Variational inference replaces the true posterior with a tractable distribution:

$$
q(z)
$$

and tries to make $q(z)$ close to $p(z|x)$.

---

#### 3.1.3] Why Care about Posterior?

The **posterior distribution**

$$
p(z \mid x) = \frac{p(x,z)}{p(x)}
$$

tells us **what the latent variables $z$ are likely to be given the observed data $$x$$**. In probabilistic modeling, the latent variables usually represent the **hidden structure that generated the data**, and the posterior is how we infer that structure.

On one hand, the Posterior represents __inference__. The above Bayesian formulation includes $$z$$ as the hidden cause / latent representation with $$x$$ the observed data. Consequently, the **posterior** $$p(z \mid x) $$ answers the question:

> Given the data we observed, what latent explanations are plausible?

Consequently, the posterior is the **distribution of explanations of the data**, and ELBO and variational inference exist because **posterior inference is usually intractable**.

In real applications, posterior appears in many core tasks:

* for Bayesian statistics, posterior updates beliefs: $$ p(\theta \mid D) $$
* For latent variable models, we have Variational Autoencoders (VAEs), Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs), Hidden Markov Models (HMMs). In all of them we want $$ p(z|x) $$ to infer hidden structure, e.g.: latent representation, cluster assignment, and hidden state sequence.

---

#### 3.1.4] From the Log Evidence to ELBO

We want to understand

$$
\log p(x)
$$

(which is defined as the evidence) Insert $$q(z)$$ inside the integral:

$$
\log p(x)
= \log \int p(x,z) dz
= \log \int q(z)\frac{p(x,z)}{q(z)} dz
$$

Rewrite as an expectation:

$$
\log p(x) = \log \mathbb{E}_{q(z)} \left[\frac{p(x,z)}{q(z)}\right]
$$

Now we naturally proceed to obtain ELBO (using Jensen's Inequality)

Because $$\log$$ is **concave**, Jensen gives

$$
\log \mathbb{E}[Y] \ge \mathbb{E}[\log Y]
$$

Apply it:

$$
\log p(x)
\ge
\mathbb{E}_{q(z)}
\left[
\log \frac{p(x,z)}{q(z)}
\right]
$$

We define this quantity on the right hand side as the Evidence Lower Bound (**ELBO**), which indicates the lower bound of evidence, as the name suggests.

---

#### 3.1.5] Other Decompositions of ELBO
There're two usual ways of writing ELBO. The first is 

$$
\text{ELBO}(q) = \mathbb{E}_{q(z)} \left[ \log p(x,z) - \log q(z) \right]
= \mathbb{E}_{q(z)} \left[ \log p(x,z) \right] + H(q(z))
$$

Another is by expanding $$p(x,z)$$:

$$
\log p(x,z) = \log p(x|z) + \log p(z)
$$

So

$$
\text{ELBO}= \mathbb{E}_{q(z)}[\log p(x|z)] - \text{KL}(q(z)\|p(z))
$$

This is the form used in many algorithms and we could interpret this as the reconstruction $$\mathbb{E}_{q(z)}[\log p(x|z)]$$ and regularization $$ KL(q(z) || p(z)) $$. 

Another key identity here:

$$
\log p(x) = \text{ELBO}(q) + KL(q(z) || p(z|x))
$$

Since KL divergence is always nonnegative (this is another way to interpret ELBO or even to derive it form scratch),

$$
\text{ELBO}(q) \le \log p(x)
$$

Maximizing ELBO **minimizes**

$$
KL(q(z) || p(z|x))
$$

so $$q(z)$$ becomes a good approximation to the true posterior.


Let's re-iterate the ELBO decomposition:

$$
\log p(x) =
\text{ELBO} + KL(q(z) || p(z|x))
$$

Consequently, 

- evidence = lower bound + approximation error

When

$$
q(z) = p(z|x)
$$

then

$$
KL = 0
$$

and

$$
ELBO = \log p(x)
$$

meaning the bound becomes tight.

---

#### 3.1.6] Why ELBO Exists

We want the posterior

$$
p(z|x)
$$

but computing it requires

$$
p(x) = \int p(x,z) dz
$$

which is usually intractable.

So variational inference approximates

$$
p(z|x) \approx q(z)
$$

and ELBO is the optimization objective used to find the best approximation.

---

#### 3.1.7] Another (Perhaps More Transparent) Perspective to Explore ELBO
In the above we've introduced several decomopositions of ELBO and how to derive it, all of which are centered around the evidence $$\log p(x)$$. However, there's another angle to access ELBO, which perhaps ties more closely towards the joint distribution we presented at the beginning. 

As we said before, we want to approximate $$p(x\mid z)$$ as  $$p_\theta(x\mid z)$$, and then by integration

$$
p_\theta(x)=\int p_\theta(x\mid z)p(z)\,dz
$$

to obtain the generative model. Equivalentl, we could also manage approximation on the joint distribution of $$x$$ and $$z$$, because 

$$
p(x,z)=p(x\mid z)p(z)
$$

and similarly

$$
p_\theta(x,z)=p_\theta(x\mid z)p(z)
$$

Usually, to narrow the difference of distributions, we would use KL divergence. After the following calculations 

$$
KL(p(x,z) \parallel p_\theta(x,z))
= \iint p(x,z)\log\frac{p(x,z)}{p_\theta(x,z)}\,dz\,dx
$$

$$
= \int\int p(x)p(z\mid x) \log\frac{p(x)p(z\mid x)}{p_\theta(x,z)}\,dzdx
$$

$$
= \int p(x) (\int p(z\mid x) \log\frac{p(x)p(z\mid x)}{p_\theta(x,z)}\,dz) dx
$$

$$
= \mathbb{E}_{x\sim p(x)}
\left[
\int p(z\mid x)\log\frac{p(x)p(z\mid x)}{p_\theta(x,z)}\,dz
\right]
$$

$$
= \mathbb{E}_{x\sim p(x)}
\left[
\int p(z\mid x)
\left(
\log p(x)+\log\frac{p(z\mid x)}{p_\theta(x,z)}
\right)
dz
\right]
$$

$$
= \mathbb{E}_{x\sim p(x)}
\left[
\log p(x)\int p(z\mid x)dz
\right]
+
\mathbb{E}_{x\sim p(x)}
\left[
\int p(z\mid x)\log\frac{p(z\mid x)}{p_\theta(x,z)}dz
\right]
$$

Notice that the first term

$$
\mathbb{E}_{x\sim p(x)}
\left[
\log p(x)\int p(z\mid x)dz
\right]
= \mathbb{E}_{x\sim p(x)}[\log p(x)]
$$

is just a constant, let's reorganize the above (notice that I change the order of the numerator/denominator inside $$\log$$):

$$
\mathbb{E}_{x\sim p(x)}
\left[
\int p(z\mid x)\log\frac{p_\theta(x,z)}{p(z\mid x)}dz
\right] = C - KL(p(x,z)\parallel p_\theta(x,z))
$$

where the constant $$C = \mathbb{E}_{x\sim p(x)}[\log p(x)]$$

We could again define the left hand side as the evidence lower bound. Now, again we have the previous interpretation: if we minimize KL divergence, this is equivalent to maximizing our ELBO. In fact, if you look close enough, this is consistent with our previous definition. 

Now, are there also similar decompositins of ELBO derived in this framework? Definitely, it's the same decomposition in essence! Notice that we have the following two decompositions:

$$ ELBO = 
\mathbb{E}_{x\sim p(x)}
\left[
\int p(z\mid x)\log\frac{p_\theta(x,z)}{p(z\mid x)}dz
\right]
$$

$$
= \mathbb{E}_{x\sim p(x)}
\left[
\int p(z\mid x)\log\frac{p_\theta(x\mid z)p(z)}{p(z\mid x)}dz
\right]
$$

$$
= \mathbb{E}_{x\sim p(x)}
\left[
\int p(z\mid x)\log p_\theta(x\mid z)dz -
\int p(z\mid x)\log\frac{p(z\mid x)}{p(z)}dz
\right]
$$

$$
= \mathbb{E}_{x\sim p(x)}
\left[
\mathbb{E}_{z\sim p(z\mid x)}[\log p_\theta(x\mid z)] - KL(p(z\mid x)\parallel p(z))
\right]
$$

or 

$$ ELBO = 
\mathbb{E}_{x\sim p(x)}
\left[
\int p(z\mid x)\log\frac{p_\theta(x,z)}{p(z\mid x)}dz
\right]
$$

$$
= \mathbb{E}_{x\sim p(x)}
\left[
\int p(z\mid x)\log\frac{p_\psi(z\mid x)p(x)}{p(z\mid x)}dz
\right]
$$

$$
= \mathbb{E}_{x\sim p(x)}
\left[
\int p(z\mid x)\log p(x)dz -
\int p(z\mid x)\log\frac{p(z\mid x)}{p_\psi(z \mid x)}dz
\right]
$$

$$
= \mathbb{E}_{x\sim p(x)}
\left[\log p(x) -
KL(p(z\mid x)\parallel {p_\psi(z \mid x)}
\right]
$$

These two decompositions differ just by different factorization of the joint distribtion. However, it reveals a few significant remarks: 

* For both decomposition, there's a subtle replacement of expectation for the KL term. It does not matter because $$p(z|x)$$ will be $$0$$ for $$z$$ no in the support of $$p(z|x)$$ for specific $$x$$. Again, we could arrive at this formulation from the previous decomposition, just by replacing $$q(z)$$ with $$p(z|x)$$. 

* Another benefit of this framework reveals a perhaps neglected fact. It's fine that we are using neural network to approximate $$p_\theta(x|z)$$, but now we need the ability to sample the latents $$z$$ conditionally, i.e. $$p_\psi(z|x)$$. Not surprisingly, this might also be replaced by a neural network. Consequently, for decomposition 1 we should actually write the following: 

$$
= \mathbb{E}_{x\sim p(x)}
\left[
\mathbb{E}_{z\sim p_\psi(z\mid x)}[\log p_\theta(x\mid z)] - KL(p_\psi(z\mid x)\parallel p(z))
\right]
\tag{3.2}
$$

* Usually (as we will see later for VAE), the approximtion $$p_\psi(z|x)$$ is called the encoder, while $$p_\theta(x|z)$$ is called the decoder. 

* The second decomposition indicates that maximizing the log-likelihood and minimizing KL divergence are compatible with each other, echoeing the equivalence of each other from the previous section (these two are not exactly the same, but I find it interesting to loop these two results together). 

* Comparing decomposition 2 with 1, since when we train ELBO we usually utilize version 1, the posterior $$p_\psi(z|x)$$ is regularized according to the prior $$p(z)$$. Consequently, while maximizing the ELBO, according to decomposition 2, we are actually minimizing $$KL(p(z\mid x)\parallel {p_\psi(z \mid x)}$$. However, this will generally not be 0 because the prior $$p(z)$$ is not in general the same as the posterior $$p(z\mid x)$$. 

* In other words, the goal of a latent variable generative model is to __minimize the ELBO, which is equivalent to maximizing the log-likelihood while regulating the posterior based on the prior__, using (potentially) neural networks to parametrize both the encoder and decoder. This abstract goal will be made very concrete in VAE (well, if you read up to this point, you already master the essense of VAE). 

#### 3.1.8] Implications and Hints for Model Design
Consequently, based on the above analysis we understand that our designs of neural networks for the encoder $$p_\psi(z\mid x)$$ and the decoder $$p_\theta(x\mid z)$$ need to satisfy the following conditions:

* For the decoder, it should be easy for us to calculate the log-likelihoood (after Monte-Carlo sampling, refer to formula xx) and also if we use the mean to replace sampling, its mean should be easy to obtain. 
* For the encoder, its KL divergence with the prior $$p(z)$$ should also be easy to calculate

Well, you might already come up with a candidate distribution. Hold on for 

---

### 3.2] Specific Examples

#### 3.2.1] Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE)
Variational Auto-Encoder is based on Auto-Encoder, which generally is not interpted as a genereative model, other than a nonlinear dimenionality reduction technique. But another way to look at it is to treat the underlying posterior (encoder) and likelihood (decoder) as delta/Dirac function, respectively:

$$
p(z\mid x) = \delta_{E(x)}(z)
$$

$$
p(x\mid z) = \delta_{D(z)}(x)
$$

and the neural networks in essence just approximate these two (unknown) functions $$E(x)$$ and $$D(z)$$. Essentially, there's no innate stochasticity: every single observed $$x$$ is mapped to a latent $$z$$, and each $$z$$ is mapped to an $$x$$. We also assume that the prior is uniform: $$p(z) = \frac{1}{K}$$, for some $$K > 0$$. 

Indeed, if we want to use the probabilistic framework to interpret AE training, we could assume that 

$$
p_\psi(z \mid x) = \mathcal{N}(E_\psi(x), \Sigma_x^2)
$$

and 

$$
p_\theta(x \mid z) = \mathcal{N}(D_\theta(z), \Sigma_z^2)
$$

(please allow me for confusing the distribution and density for convenience) where $$\Sigma_x$$ and $$\Sigma_z$$ are very small (approaching 0). Interested readers might apply 3.2. After simplification, it should be the intuitive good-old friend L2 minimization (MSE loss). 

Let me do the 1-dimensional case. From our derived loss function, the first term is 

$$
\mathbb{E}_{x\sim p(x)}
\left[
\mathbb{E}_{z\sim p_\psi(z\mid x)}[\log p_\theta(x\mid z)]
\right]
$$

$$
= \mathbb{E}_{x\sim p(x)}
\left[
\mathbb{E}_{z\sim p_\psi(z\mid x)}[\log (\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi} \sigma_z}\exp(\frac{-(x - D_\theta(z))^2)}{2\sigma_z^2})]
\right]
$$

$$
= \log (\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi}\sigma_z}) + \mathbb{E}_{x\sim p(x)}
\left[
\mathbb{E}_{z\sim p_\psi(z\mid x)}\frac{-(x - D_\theta(z))^2)}{2\sigma_z^2}
\right]
$$

$$
= \log (\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi}\sigma_z}) - \frac{1}{2\sigma_z^2}\mathbb{E}_{x\sim p(x)}
\left[(x - D_\theta(E_\psi(x)))^2)
\right]
$$

Consequently, this is just the usual MSE term based on the sampling ($$x \sim p(x)$$) and our dirac assumption $$p(z\mid x) = \delta_{E(x)}(z)$$, approximated by $$p_\psi(z\mid x) = \lim_{\sigma_x =\rightarrow 0}\mathcal{N}(E_\psi(x), \sigma_x^2) = \delta_{E_\psi(x)}(z)$$

For the second term, 

$$
KL(p_\psi(z\mid x)\parallel p(z))
$$

$$
= \int_z \delta_{E_\psi(x)}(z)\log\frac{\delta_{E_\psi(x)}(z)}{p(z)} dz
$$

$$
= \int_z \delta_{E_\psi(x)}(z)\log \delta_{E_\psi(x)}(z) dz  - \int_z \delta_{E_\psi(x)}(z)\log p(z) dz
$$

$$
= \int_z \delta_{E_\psi(x)}(z)\log \delta_{E_\psi(x)}(z) dz  - \log p(E_\psi(x))
$$

$$
= \int_z \mathcal{N}(E_\psi(x), \sigma_x^2)\log \mathcal{N}(E_\psi(x), \sigma_x^2) dz - \log p(E_\psi(x))
$$

$$
= \int_z  (\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi} \sigma_x}\exp(\frac{-(z - E_\psi(x))^2}{2\sigma_x^2}) \log (\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi} \sigma_x}\exp(\frac{-(z - E_\psi(x))^2}{2\sigma_x^2})dz - \log p(E_\psi(x))
$$

$$
= \int_z  (\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi} \sigma_x}\exp(\frac{-(z - E_\psi(x))^2}{2\sigma_x^2}) (\log(\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi} \sigma_x}) + \frac{-(z - E_\psi(x))^2}{2\sigma_x^2})dz - \log p(E_\psi(x))
$$

$$
= \int_z  (\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi} \sigma_x}\exp(\frac{-(z - E_\psi(x))^2}{2\sigma_x^2}) \log(\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi} \sigma_x}) + (\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi} \sigma_x}\exp(\frac{-(z - E_\psi(x))^2}{2\sigma_x^2}) \frac{-(z - E_\psi(x))^2}{2\sigma_x^2})dz - \log p(E_\psi(x))
$$

$$
= \log(\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi} \sigma_x}) -  \frac{1}{2\sigma_x^2} \int_z \frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi} \sigma_x}\exp(\frac{-(z - E_\psi(x))^2}{2\sigma_x^2})(z - E_\psi(x))^2dz - \log p(E_\psi(x))
$$

$$
= \log(\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi} \sigma_x}) -  \frac{1}{2\sigma_x^2} \sigma_x^2 - \log p(E_\psi(x))
$$

$$
= -\log(\sqrt{2\pi} \sigma_x) -  \frac{1}{2} + K
$$

In the last step I used the fact that we assume the prior is uniform. From the above we know that the loss function fo AE is just MSE loss (the KL term has nothing to do with $$\theta, \psi$$). Also, I'm using $$\sigma_z$$ instead of $$\Sigma_z$$ because I'm working on the 1-dim case. For higher dimensions it's the same idea and I'll leave it to the readers to prove it. Should not be too complicated. 

[TODO]: Question: why assume prior $$p(z)$$ to be uniform? 

Now, the adaptation from AE to VAE will be self-evident. Without treating a 1-to-1 correspondence between the observable $$x$$ and latent $$z$$, we think of each $$x$$ mapping to a distribution in the latent space $$p(z\mid x)$$. From such superposed position we extract samples out of $$p(x\mid z)$$. We are basically using the full power of the stochasticity which we truncated for simplicity within AE modeling. 

The first term again is 

$$
\mathbb{E}_{x\sim p(x)}
\left[
\mathbb{E}_{z\sim p_\psi(z\mid x)}[\log p_\theta(x\mid z)]
\right]
$$

$$
= \mathbb{E}_{x\sim p(x)}
\left[
\mathbb{E}_{z\sim p_\psi(z\mid x)}[\log (\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi} \sigma_z}\exp(\frac{-(x - D_\theta(z))^2)}{2\sigma_z^2})]
\right]
$$

$$
= \log (\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi}\sigma_z}) + \mathbb{E}_{x\sim p(x)}
\left[
\mathbb{E}_{z\sim p_\psi(z\mid x)}\frac{-(x - D_\theta(z))^2)}{2\sigma_z^2}
\right]
$$

Now instead of treating $$p_\psi(z|x) = \delta_{E_\psi(x)}(z)$$ 

we restore the stochasticity back as $$p_\psi(z|x) = \mathcal{N}(E_\psi(x), \sigma_x^2)$$. Consequently, during training after acquiring the samples from data distribution $$p(x)$$, we sample $$z$$ according to $$p_\psi(z|x) = \mathcal{N}(E_\psi(x), \sigma_x^2)$$ and evaluate the MSE term. Consequently, it's not inherently different from AE, apart from the sampling procedure, instead of directly evaluating

$$
\log (\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi}\sigma_z}) - \frac{1}{2\sigma_z^2}\mathbb{E}_{x\sim p(x)}
\left[(x - D_\theta(E_\psi(x)))^2)
\right]
$$

Another fundamental difference happens for the KL regularization term:

$$
KL(p_\psi(z\mid x)\parallel p(z))
$$

$$
= \int_z \mathcal{N}(E_\psi(x), \sigma_x^2)\log\frac{\mathcal{N}(E_\psi(x), \sigma_x^2)}{\mathcal{N}(0, 1)}dz
$$

$$
= \int_z \frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi}\sigma_x}\exp(\frac{-(z - E_\psi(x))^2}{2\sigma_x^2}) \log\frac{\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi}\sigma_x}\exp(\frac{-(z - E_\psi(x))^2}{2\sigma_x^2})}{\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi}}\exp(\frac{-z^2}{2})}dz
$$

$$
= \int_z \frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi}\sigma_x}\exp(\frac{-(z - E_\psi(x))^2}{2\sigma_x^2}) (\log \frac{1}{\sigma_x} + \frac{z^2}{2} - \frac{(z - E_\psi(x)^2)}{2\sigma_x^2}) dz
$$

$$
= \log\frac{1}{\sigma_x} + \frac{1}{2}(\sigma_x^2 + E^2_\psi(x)) - \frac{1}{2\sigma_x^2}\sigma_x^2
$$

$$
= \log\frac{1}{\sigma_x} + \frac{1}{2}(\sigma_x^2 + E^2_\psi(x)) - \frac{1}{2}
$$

Notice that with VAE the KL divergence term is not trivial. 







You might have the question: Given that we have $$p_\theta(x\mid z)$$ and $$p_\psi(z\mid x)$$, how are we going to sample/generate? Well, in VAE, there's no need to do integration:

$$
p_\theta(x) = \int_z p_\theta(x|z)p(z)dz
$$

(anyway, even after knowing $$p_\theta(x)$$ there's still the problem of how to sample). We just do the following: Given $$p_\theta(x)$$, we will use the corresponding output mean to replace the sampling process, e.g.: $$\text{Output}(z) = \mu(x\mid z)$$, where $$\mu(x\mid z)$$ is the mean of $$p_\theta(x\mid z)$$. 

