---
layout: page
title:  "The Door of Flowers"
date:   2023-11-08 23:00:51 -0500
category: literature
---

The Door of Flowers


“Is it possible to go back by crossing the door of flowers from the other direction?”


“This is me, the words you see above. Yes, I’m this single line of 83 characters (without space and including the question mark). Or I should say this is not the entire me. Anyway, finally I figure out how to communicate myself to the world! The world I came from! You should be able to read me now. Sorry if I’m babbling nonsense since even right now, I’m not particularly aware how I came to be like this. I’ve been in this constantly transforming phase for a long time and I’ll try to be concise before I accidentally turn into something else and vanish from your screen.

 

Let me formally introduce myself: my name is Ruixiang and I’m, or I was, a rising senior at Johns Hopkins University in United States. Since you could read English, I assume you are of Homo Sapiens just like me. I was pondering some existentialist questions before my desk one night, struggling to convince my friend why reality is not all solid on at least physical, physiological, and language levels, and, taking one bold step further, we perhaps are not even necessarily inclined to pursue truth and we’re not designed to be confined to the physiological shape we acquire. The power of abstraction from reality and the will to distill coolness from the hot melting mess of the rampaging and chaotic world into reliable and solid concepts endow me hopes for a life far more complex than current sensations could produce in me. At that thinking moment my passion was surging, coursing through my body, a feeling so familiar yet recalling back mystical or religious solemnity; suddenly I felt I was under some huge door made of various colorful flowers. Some propulsive forces were pushing me through it. It all happened within one second and after the next blink of my eye I found myself lying on a narrow straw boat. I alone in bright white cloth robe, tidy and clean yet wore out, exhibiting how the person who had it on was trying to manage a respectable and plain life. There was barely anything on this tiny boat. Merely some stacks of dog-eared books, the covers of which grew wet dark green mosses, perhaps due to the lingering moisture on the river surface and a little white notebook whose surface was smooth and clean.

 

I looked at “my” hands closely: there were innumerous stripes of burrows and wrinkles, unlike my hands, I mean, Ruixiang’s hands, which are relatively smooth and simple, with stiff calluses on the right middle finger after years of writing. However, I could hardly recall many details of the image of my hand, and the nociceptive and proprioceptive feelings I was so accustomed for more than twenty years seemed to fade away from my mind in this new boatman body. I felt a little fainted looking at this pair of dark hand now, under the bright sun above. I assumed it’s at noon. The concepts that I based my feelings upon, the memory of once a pair of totally different hand, was gradually engulfed away, leaving a husk of notion that I once had such wrinkleless hands. It vaguely recurred to me the Russian literary theorist Shklovsky, about his famous notion of defamiliarization. But the tiny difference is, this time, I was both the artist and the audience. The two ends met together at this boatman’s body, with the boatman’s memory and concepts squeezing away my own edge by edge. I felt such defamiliarization for both my soul and memory, with the current reality my eyes and all sensations presented: on this brand new dreamlike foggy river, with moistened books, old robe, and wrinkled hands, I horribly realized how I lived most of my past life mainly on distilled concepts and solid imageries abstracted from only several first time fresh and hot experiences, out of which the cold rules and stern regulations gave commands and judgements for everything new that came after. The horror of familiarization or habituation is that, after the concepts got rooted, hardly ever would our sensations pour fresh stimulus into our perceptions of the reality. I stopped at all pondering before this pitch-dark abyss, realizing how trivial the masking effects of language had on perceiving the world. The distinctions different languages represented reality with, and the levels of significant abstraction and simplification languages applied to realities, seemed at this moment true indeed but not worthy of much attention. Because given such distinctions and simplification, there were still tons of imageries and sounds to sense; however, it would be a severe crime to not treasure, either actively or passively (perhaps more passively) the limited yet still abundant reality by staying numbed by concepts we meticulously weaved.

 

I was pondering these language-related issues on the boat, suddenly realizing that while I was thinking, I was swiftly jotting down all the thoughts I had on the white notebook. I was about to continue writing my conflicting attitude with language when suddenly, after the next blink of the eye, I was holding a dark green branch of leaves and flowers at hand instead of the notebook. Now recalling that moment, similar to the swift and smooth transformation from the College student Ruixiang to the boatman, on the screen as words I still felt so disentangled with the perception of time and space. It’s a sensation of being able to fit everything. Put in another sense, it’s not like I was walking and passing through time or space, but time and space were coursing through me with matter and energy which constantly shaped my body. Let me stop rambling here and give you the conclusion: I spent about five seconds observing my new form. It’s still a human shape but dressed in casual brown jacket and dark blue jeans. I was wearing thick glasses and when I reached my hands towards them, I touched upon the moustache on my face which surprised me how stiff they were. I realized I was in another person’s body again, wearing a huge heavy backpack. I must be so silly standing there completely perplexed. It also seemed I had a companion several feet away in front with a guitar on the back. I looked around and found we two in a shallow forest in a mountain not too high, and a river at the foot upon which there’s a boat and someone in white seemed lying on it. I felt dizzy and my mind couldn’t make out the whole things. Searching for the memory of the moment when I first transformed into the boatman, horrifyingly my mind seemed stuck in a hot marsh and being engulfed with heavy clumps of mud, unable to rotate around any clear logic. However, at the same time I felt another slight piece of cold and crystal-clear memory sneaking into my mind. It was in a lecture hall or office typical of classical college buildings, two persons quarrelling with each other. The one with brown jacket and dark jeans was passionate, his tears welling up and hands dancing in the air. His white stiff moustache seemed to be dancing fiercely along with his gaping mouth. I heard clearly what he strived to convey: “No, all modern philosophers, literary criticists, linguists, and even physicists! You all deprecate the values of taxonomy, claiming that language is merely a rather crude and limited representation of reality! But what then? Using silence to live on? Look, you don’t understand, that doubting or deconstructing itself gives no solution, but completely renders chaos in people’s minds. We need orders and models for the world. Life is and always should be its own values and evaluation! You are merely gratified for being aware of the drawbacks of language, but when you relentlessly broached for your seemingly audacious claims about your precious so-called truth, you were not at all being solid! You reveled in your irresponsible power of demolishing values, but you almost slide into nonsense or nihilism!” The man was inflated, his image crystal clear under the sunset gilding the entire room, and gradually I could see no more any clear image where these two people blended in with a softening patch of gold radiances melting my vision… “Xavier! Xavier!” The golden sphere was fading, I reclaiming my focused vision with better clarity. The man with the guitar was patting my shoulder, “Hey! Are you there? Didn’t sleep well last night?”

 

“I was…” I was about to say I’m not Xavier when suddenly I gave out a C major chord sound. I was astonished I saw nothing but the entire field of darkness. That feeling was even more drastically different than the previous two because for this time I lost my usual sensations at all. Heat, pain, temperature, feet, or hands, I felt no more anything familiar. Yet there’s some strange shape that I felt I could manipulate, something like wooden hollow box-like body and metal strings. Am I a, a guitar? I did carry with me memories and it took me about 10 seconds to grasp and accept the concept I was assembling that I am indeed a guitar. What a new world! Without any human perception, sensing no light, heat, or shape, but endowed with a subtle vibrative field “sensation”. It spent me another 10 seconds to confirm that I was equipped with 6 strings, three nylon and three metal. You won’t believe in me but when I was a guitar, as I said I had drastically enhanced tactile sensibility: I could immediately pinpoint that 3.48 feet away at location (13.5, 9.7, 21.3) inches, in rectangular coordinates centered at myself, there was a mosquito due to its unique flipping frequencies of its noisy wings; I felt the wriggling larva underneath the mud, the incoming storm wind from at least 5 miles away, and the rattlesnake gulping down a lion in the valley at the moment. I felt anything by vibrations and vibrations from vibrations. It would be hard to describe it using the language we had now, since humans are poor at touch generally. My strings vibrated according to the lives and reflections of lives’ activities from inanimate things and thus I knew the reality. The famous proclamation of Descartes would probably be rephrased as “I vibrate therefore I am” for me as a guitar, but even this is substantially misleading because the way I “am” and the logic I derived from vibration, a pure objective action to existential conditions, is also drastically different from humans. Anyway, I realized this subtle point only after I took hundreds of other forms later on but my point here is that I felt indeed a different reality. I felt the river and the boat not far away, with the smooth dynamics of schools of fish and the constantly changing interface of the boat and the water surface. Finally and uniquely, I felt language by the vibration of my first and fourth string fluctuating accordingly. Again, I spent some time to learn such decoding since I had no human hearing, but then I “heard” what the sounds were: “Ok Xavier, according to your rambling speech for 5 minutes just for my single question whether you slept well last night, I assume we should go back earlier today” “No worries, Richard! I’m fine! Look at what I found at my hand! A new species of Mimosa Pudica! I will shock the botanists and tell them I found a new reality they all need to update their mind with!””

 

Richard…Mentioning this name brought me that dizzy feeling again. Already somewhat anticipating it, I assumed this time I was going to integrate the memory of the guitar. But how? I found no words to accurately describe how I acquired the guitar’s memory, but the best analogy I could draw was when you took a freshly baked bagel and that smell elicited the memory of your distant eighteenth birthday party when you mother made you a feast of bagels of your favorite flavors. It’s those strings. The lingering dust, sweat, dander, and the fingering patterns he tucked me with, all precisely encoded the past from the first time he touched me till now. I felt his sincere pleasure every time he played me, and I responded with his intended melodies, ideal or not. I “saw” his wild laughter when he had me on his waist, standing on the pile of abandoned gigantic equipment of the iron plant to be relocated. I remembered that it was 2009 when there was a nation-wide wave of layoffs due to helpless inflation. He stood there, with his post punk band not dismissed yet, and roared for how capitalism alienated people and for those cut off from the plant and thus literally expelled from that age of hopelessness into lives of poverty and uncertainty. This little boy, at that time only 26, oh such previous and scintillating romantic youth. I thought he was like a real post punk star. I could sense his love for music, or more broadly, his longing for all kinds of art: literature, films, and fine art, etc. Those subtle and finitely many combinations of vibrations indeed restored each single piece of memory of my experience with Richard. I remembered his most severe and deep roaring call when he stood on top of the apartment he lived in at 2018 when he was in his most abject destitution. He had me on his back, firmly gazing into the distant and confronting with the biting winter bise from the front and showered in the golden sunset from the back, words bumping out clearly and solemnly: “I would not give up! Don’t let me sink back into the world dominated by superficial utilitarianism and the right of speech “naturally” endowed by science. This is an age without meaning! You know it! I never regret renouncing my career as a potentially successful biomedical scientist! I despise people confusing between “it’s so interesting!” with a feigned naïve aha moment and the in-depth “I’m drunk in such passion”. Don’t debase no notion of “passion”! I indeed found science interesting, yet it was hopelessly and helplessly feeble in providing passion upon which life’s meaning is based. Art could! I say loudly and defiantly that art could! Science bridles people to the so-called truth, but what does truth mean for life at all? Does 1+1=3 bothering any life at all down to their souls?! Do not be tamed with causality and thus transformed into the spokesman for any cold logic. Look at people’s sorrows, joyfulness, farewell, and reunions around! Isn’t it the utmost treasure and enjoyment to acquire the potential to break the world as it is and possibly connect and reveal any hidden, or even more profoundly, creating new associations? This is what art strives to accomplish, not science! This is what I will devote my life to! I will never give up!”

 

There are other pieces like this in my memory as a guitar. Deeply touched, no sooner was I about to feel Richard’s warm back when I felt myself dizzy again. Ah, I guess I will need to shorten my narrative since now as words I also feel such uncomfortable feelings I’m actually quite familiar with now. After taking the guitar form, I transformed into mosses on the white notebook on the boat, the lion just one second before gulped down by that huge viper, and many other forms some of which I could not even recover now. Either live or inanimate, their memories were input into my mind as I hopped around different forms. I have to admit at first, I was horrified since I thought I was stuck in this space, but gradually I fell not surprised by it but I was still looking for access to that door of flower. Confirmed by many others who have been brought here, they all passed that door. I know some people here who enjoy the almost infinite memories, joyful or poignant. You should also not worry about my existence, since for most of the time I’m still Ruixiang, but became randomized into others’ bodies only sporadically. People got lost instantly and recovered then. As words I spent lots of effort to convey you the memories but here it all happened within milliseconds. Except for the newly coming, most of us here are accustomed to such switching mechanism. I’m myself taken up by someone else at least for more than twenty times. This is of course different from Nietzsche’s idea of eternal recurrence, but more similar to reincarnation from Buddhism. Not sure if Nietzsche got inspiration from Buddha. Sorry I feel I like I’m going to transform into other forms now. I am responsible for all words here that I’m not fabricating any lies. I will…”

 

 

 

 

“The Boatman:

Ha, it is real! The rumor that once turned into words you could speak to the human world! Hello there. I’m the boatman mentioned in the previous narrative. My name is Wuji. I was born discarded and fortunately picked up by a couple living on a boat. They gave me the name and brought me up. The old couple died very early, and I managed myself edging through all these years by taking people across river. This river is a popular tourist attraction, so my life is not wanting anything essential. When I rest I also went on social media. Ah, you won’t be interested in me talking about my life, but I do want to tell you something. Even I’m a laborer without much education, I still want to learn and improve. Once one passenger forgot to take her Nietzsche’s books on my boat. I couldn’t find her however I searched so then I started to read them. I didn’t understand much of the content, but I did get my mind reconstructed. After years of repetitive reading, the books became dog-eared and due to the moisture at river surface, the books started to grow mosses. One day some passengers saw me reading on the boat and they were astonished. I didn’t expect it when they took out their large phones and took pictures of me reading my Nietzsche. Initially, I thought it was nothing yet just one day later I saw on the social media I was on the top search. People were talking vehemently whether a boatman, and more broadly a laborer (including those farmers or workers in factories), would be appropriate to read abstruse philosophy. I felt humiliated and when I was pondering the question of how philosophy transformed me, I was sent to this space. I only remembered passing through a door made of vibrant flowers after a blink and the next second I’m in this mystical space. I think I’d about to transf…”

 

 

“The Botanist/Taxonomist:

Let me be brief and concise. My name is Xavier Maximoff and I found a new species of Mimosa Pudica. This is the greatest ever findings in my life so far. I rediscovered truth, or I repolished the truth to the world! Check in your world if you have this species: Uniquely, its inflorescence is… ”

 

 

“The Guitarist:

I’m Richard Kent. I don’t know how you would find the door of flowers we all went through. But I do strongly suggest you trying to find it. In the previous main narrative both Xavier and I were new here and knew nothing about the mechanism. Everyone here would experience anyone else’s memory. We turn into everything and be anything for certain moments sporadically and continue with our own lives. We really understand what perspectivism suggests instead of viewing the world from some narrow absolute lens. Isn’t this the ultimate form of life?”

 

 